Hi, I'm here today with Matt Martin, experienced architect at Ithaka.
And we're gonna talk about user experience and the user experience field,
with a focus on user experience design, and
what designers contribute to the field of user experience.
So, welcome, and thank you very much for being here.
>> Thank you.
>> So, tell me a little bit about what you're doing at Ithaca right now.
>> Okay.
So, I work on a team with software engineers, quality insurance engineers,
a product manager, and a visual designer, and then myself.
And what I try to do is I setup enough strategy, enough design work
collaboratively with my team, to kinda get that work ready for development.
So, I would say I spent half of my days in meetings, and
half of my days doing design, and it's very collaborative.
So, there is gonna be some times where I'm heads down work doing some designs, or
doing some research.
But then there'll be a lot of times where I'm brainstorming strategy with
my product manager, or working with a user
researcher to make sure that we're gonna set up the right type of user testing.
And then my visual designer, who I collaborate a lot with, is in New York.
So, we'll sometimes do some screen sharing,
where we'll collaborate on a design.
Or I'll just start sketching on a whiteboard, and I'll take pictures of it,
and send it to her.
And say okay, I just created this really quickly.
Can you bring back something to me?
And then we'll kind of collaborate that way.
So, it's like, we have these pods of teams that, like I said, are blinded.
And then some other times, I'll meet with whole UX department.
The other designers, to find out, hey, what are you working on?
And how is it going to influence what I'm doing?
Sometimes I'm doing parts of the site.
Or some of our products that do touch each other.
And sometimes, I'm kinda on my own.
Or it's a product that's not touching other things.
So.
>> Could you give us an example of maybe a project that you've worked on,
and try and take us through how it started, and how it progressed through
the different stages until it became however it ended up?
>> Okay.
So, we needed to do a redesign of the strategy in research, arm of ethical.
So, they had a website that was aging but
not only that, their business model and some of the programs are changed.
So, we needed to do a refresh on the website to kind represent
that new program that they were trying to focus on, and also,
to do a better job of having that website reflect their business objectives.
So. >> Could you maybe just say real
quick what the strategy and research?
>> Yes. >> The strategy and research.
Well, who are the users, and what are they trying to do with this website?
>> So primarily, what the strategy and
research arm does is they work with libraries and higher education,
and they deal with the administrators and librarians to basically get
technology and libraries kinda ready for the future.
>> Okay. >> How does technology influence that?
And one of their programs that they started to promote, and
that started new just last year is called Educational Transformation, which is how
about how is education being transformed, and how can institutions go along with it?
So they do a lot of consulting.
>> Okay.
>> They write a lot of papers, case studies, reports, issue briefs.
And librarians try to get all of that research, cuz they give it away for free.
>> Okay.
In the hopes to sell some of their products, they do survey,
they do site consulting and stuff like that.
>> I see.
>> So, what was happening was is the website was, had a lot of information
there, and have all reports, but wasn't as easy to go from one report to another, and
there wasn't really a way for the products and the reports to kinda intermingle.
>> Okay. >> And so,
it was our goal to figure out, okay, where is the business going?
How is the site working and not working?
And how can we make it work better?
So, what I did was is I interviewed all the directors, and
all the program directors, and the marketing directing there at the S+R,
was what it was called- >> Okay.
>> Ithaka S+R.
>> Okay.
>> Strategy and research, and
I did that with the user researcher, our product manager, and an engineer.
>> Mm-hm.
>> So, while we were doing that, we were taking notes.
And trying to figure out, okay, so this is how they look at their business.
This is how they look at their user.
So, we had a pretty good idea of what to do next.
And next was, let's find out what we're dealing with, and
did the content inventory of the whole site.
We started to look at the analytics of the site to find out how traffic was getting
there, and what was happening, why they were there, and
they where the users were leaving.
>> Mm-hm.
>> Next.
I did a comparative analysis, so I'm looking at all the different
competition that they have throughout the landscape.
>> Mm-hm. >> Inside their industry and
outside their industry, just to see how it happens,
how the branding happens, how the interaction design works.
So, what people are gonna expect when they go to the site.
So that we're not doing anything that's too different, or something that we
can make sure falls in people's expectations when visiting the site.
So once we did all that, in kind of concurrently,
we had the developers starting working on a framework.
So, me and the designer can start thinking ahead, and
we knew that we're gonna have to feed the developers the real full site.
But in the meantime, we wanted to have them just develop a slice of the site.
So, a working version of every single section, but
it didn't go deep with just one kind of like layer.
>> So this would be software, and you are thinking of just having the different
components kinda of in place, so that as you're doing the design, you
could actually have framework to sort of testing out and seeing how it will work.
>> Exactly.
That way there was a foundation there, we can see if things were working,
and we could find out early on that hey, this really doesn't work.
But what we did is, once we started developing,
we could see that it could scale too.
So, while the developers were doing that, I went back to the stakeholders and
said okay, you have a lot of categories here.
You don't have much consistency on topics in the way you organize your research.
So, I set up a workshop to really work on their vocabulary in taxonomy,
just the raw materials of the research.
So that we could develop a good information architecture of the site and
do positive search.
That made sense not only to them, but to the people that they're reaching out to.
>> Mm-hm.
>> Once we did that taxonomy exercise,
we didn't put it in the site until we did a card sorting task with actual users.
>> Mm-hm.
>> So, what that is we put it online, all these different topics and
categories, and had actual librarians come to this program or
site to organize how they saw those topics and categories.
Once we had that data back, then we can tell developers okay, now we figured out
how this is supposed to be chugged and categorize so they can start building it.
In that way, it was scalable and we were able to make sure that
throughout the the whole process, we're getting some input from our users.
So, once we had that slice,
we were able to start filling in the rest of the site.
And we, one of the things, not only did we wanna get librarians and
other visitors to download their reports, but we also wanted people to sign up so
that they would get news of hey, the new report is coming out.
So, we experimented with different placement of where that sign up would be,
and once we found the best place for it.
Based on a smaller set, then it's been released.
Now we've gotten I think, they're,
it's gone up at least 20% as far as the last time I checked.
Because that was.
>> The number of sign ups has gone up by 20% since the previous version.
>> Exactly.
Yep. So it has been a success, and
it really shows just by moving something on a page can really have a huge affect on
the design.
And the sign up rate was amazing.
>> Well let me ask you a couple more question about that.
So, there were a lot of different activities happening at the same time.
>> Yes. >> You had Software development happening.
A number of different research activities.
What kind of things were going on with trying to figure out.
You know what the site was gonna look like, how things were gonna be laid out,
what was connected to.
What kind of things were you doing,
in parallel to kind of work out the design of this Cybertough.
>> So I'm trying to break down the navigation in it to two different.
I guess categories, one was the persistent navigation which is what
you usually see at the top of every page.
It's the global navigation, the big buckets.
But what I spent a lot of time on with the stakeholders,
was the contextual navigation.
How is each object related to one another?
So an object could be an article,
another object could be an event that they're hosting.
And another object could be,
the person that's either writing the paper, or putting on the event.
So that way, I had all these modules that could be interrelated so
that when you're on a page, and you're on an article,
you know who wrote it, and if there's an event coming up.
And they also can point to this article relates to this product that they had,
or this kind of consulting practice that they do.
So that way, no matter when you're on the site,
you're always going to another related event or even another related article.
So you're kinda, instead of just going there, grabbing a paper and leaving,
I set it up so you could explore.
So you don't have to go up to the main navigation as an escape hatch, or
to do the exploration.
It's more in context exploration if you will.
So I spent a lot of time doing that, to make sure that people were staying on
the site, and learning as much as they can and.
Satisfying the user's needs of getting those papers.
But also, trying to help the business objective of,
hey let's get these people working with us and partnering with us.
Does that make sense?
>> It makes sense and so were you doing this through?
I'm just trying to envision like how this happens, right?
So are you sketching?
Are you making mark ups and a graphics program,
are you building interactive versions of it, and how are you working through this?
Right, It's a complicated thing you're trying to do here,
with this contextual navigation.
So how do you kinda go from,
I think this will be a cool idea to this is the right way to do it.
>> Well, I got a big piece of foam core.
>> Okay. >> And I got a bunch of sticky notes.
And what I did was, and the reason I put it on foam core is, I wanted to work
collaboratively with one of the developers to say, okay, this is what I'm thinking.
And then I also wanted to work with a stakeholder that was living in,
she was either in New York at the time or the Carolinas at the time.
So what we did is we put one computer on the board, and
we moved sticky notes around.
Like I kind of seeded it and say, hey this is how I'm envisioning it.
But since she's the marketing director, she's responsible for
a lot of the content, a lot of the editorial work flow.
All the research goes through her, and then gets populated on the site.
So she really had,
she was a subject matter expert on what's happening in the organization, so.
And then I've got the developer there just watching and seeing this,
because he's starting to estimate how much is this development time it's gonna be.
The platform we're putting it on, I think we started with a WordPress site,
wanted to make sure that was feasible.
So that way, because it was sticky notes, it was never set in stone, and
no one thought, it's in a spreadsheet, it's locked in no, it's not locked in.
Let's do a collaborative exercise where we're moving sticky notes around.
That was mobile, so I could move it to a different office,
I could take a picture of it and send it to other people to kinda get.
>> Mobile, because you could just take the foam core and.
>> Yeah. Exactly.
I can move it around and then, once I had those modules and
objects kind of figured out.
>> Mm-hm.
>> I then went into a wire framing vector based OmniGraffle.
>> Okay. >> And
started laying out how these things would look on a page.
But also how they would interact, and how they were sewn together.
>> Mm-hm.
>> And once I had that, I made it a clickable prototype.
Not for users.
I mean, that would've been great if we had that kind of resource and timing.
But we felt we did a good enough job in the strategy phase.
We felt this was good, was really just to show the stakeholders hey,
this is how we're now envisioning your site.
So they kinda had a preview, before we got into look and feel.
Cuz at the same time, our visual designer was,
hired a photographer to get some shots so that it wasn't stock photography.
It was something that was more in line with their brand.
Cuz she also wanted to kinda re-invision the brand.
So she was trying to, she was thinking about different concepts of color and
how that color would work on the site without taking.
Taking too attention away from the articles.
So kind of like, i'm doing the interaction design,
while she's kinda doing the visual and emotional design at the same time.
And so, and we're collaborating to say okay this is what i'm thinking here, and
she's saying "okay this is what i'm thinking here.".
And then we're presenting that you know, what was really great is In previous
engagements, when I wasn't inside and I was at agencies.
It was, like, we saw the client every once in a while.
And we'd have these big deliverable dates.
Where here, we said we want to meet with you at least every other week.
>> Mm-hm. >> To show you our progress.
We're never going to be.
These are never done states.
We're not having you sign off on it.
>> Okay. >> We just
want to show you what we're working on.
>> Mm-hm. >> And have you collaborate with us.
>> Mm-hm.
And I felt that was a really successful way to do it but not,
I think that's a best case scenario.
You don't always have these high level directors of
companies >> Right.
>> that you can talk to twice a week.
>> Right, right.
>> Or I'm sorry, every other week.
>> Right, right, right.
So, but that's very interesting.
So you're thinking very much about creating these artifacts that will,
facilitate certain types of communication, right?
>> Yes. >> Communication was a subject matter
expert, trying to make sure that you get it right.
Communication with the stakeholder to show progress, and
also thinking about what kind of communication you wanna have.
So it tells like you separate out conversations about the interaction
design, from conversations about the look and feel, and the typography, and
the specific images, and the colors and things like that.
So that you can have these, kind of focused conversations.
>> That's exactly right.
I'd try to make sure that I wasn't painting us in any kind of corner,
and allowing the stakeholders to have their say.
>> Mm-hm. But at the same time,
not having people get hung up on, you know,
I don't really like the font or the colors that are happening here.
And they're not paying attention to the interaction design or
some of the content strategy.
So we really did have to divorce certain things, and present certain kinda,
slowly reveal things to people so we could get the right conversation, or
the right kind of feedback.
>> Mm-hm.
So, and sometimes a sticky note, and some crude drawings are just enough.
Just to set the direction.
>> To keep it focused on that particular topic right there.
and not get distracted by these other things.
So it sounds like this story has a happy ending.
You talked about the product that sounds like was released.
You have some data that it's been successful in some ways,
and so congratulations on that.
>> Thank you.
Yes.
>> Excellent.
So I know that before joining Ithaca, how long have you been at Ithaca?
>> Three and a half years.
>> About three and a half years.
But I know from talking to you previously that
You've done a bunch of other things as well.
So I think it would be great to just hear about
what your career has been like and how you got where you are right now.
>> Okay, well I guess we can go back just before I went to graduate school.
I was a photographer and I was in a research hospital.
And we had a lab that was half chemical processes and
half digital processes cuz this was the 1900s.
So 1990s we were still doing a lot with film and chemicals.
But I saw that the digital mediums and computers and especially with
the beginning of the internet or the web photography was changing really fast.
And it was becoming more digital.
That's when I decided to go to graduate school for
human computer interaction at the School for Information.
So while I was there during the summer I got
an internship at an agency actually doing what they called usability engineering,
which was user research and doing design work.
And I worked with visual designers and frontend developers.
This was the year 2000.
So during that time the dot com bubble burst.
So the internship that I was hoping was gonna lead into full time employment
was gone.
So once I graduated from the School of Information I
went to Wayne State University to become a digital librarian.
So at my time at Wayne State it was a wonderful time.
Because we had a grant called the 21st Century Librarian.
So we had money to do special projects and fund graduate students to do the work.
And some of that work was working with the Detroit News Photo Morgue.
So we had images going back from the 1800s up until about 1980 for
digitizing all of those images and associating metadata with those and
then bringing them online for access.
The other fun project was working for the Detroit Historical Museum and
looking at their toy collection, primarily toys from the early 1900s that were
wind-up toys and putting those online just to show people how they work.
We actually got a lot of traffic from industrial designers that saw that and
kinda used that as inspiration for their work.
>> Interesting.
>> While I was a digital librarian I wasn't really doing too much UX work.
I was mainly working with professors or different libraries or
different archives and my graduate students, which was a blast.
But I also really liked to do design, user experienced design.
So I did some freelance for some agencies.
And then one day one of the agencies that I did work for
offered me fulltime employment.
So I started to go down that road.
It was a very large agency.
So it was cool because it was a print agency that was trying to figure out how
to do digital.
So I felt it was a cool kinda time of flux.
But as things progressed I realized that I don't wanna be at a huge agency,
especially an old-school agency.
I wanna be at more of a startup feel.
>> And an agency just to be clear is a company that does projects for
external clients.
So you might have a retailer one day and
a manufacturer the next day and a taxi company the other day.
And you're doing different, I'm making this up.
But you're getting to do a lot of different types
of projects and design work.
>> Absolutely, and that's what was so
fun is I usually had two concurrent projects happening.
One would be for a wireless cell phone company and
trying to figure out how they're gonna sell those products.
And then the other thing might be doing a pitch for some kind of weird branding
thing that we're gonna do like in the physical space and
how does that physical space relate to something that's gonna be on the web.
So it was always one thing was inspiring the other.
And it was always really fast design work.
Worked with a lot of cool people.
But I'm not gonna say it wasn't stressful.
It was a lot of work all the time.
Especially at a big agency you always have these huge clients, the government.
We've got the Navy, the United States Postal Service and then healthcare.
We worked in a lot of different verticals.
So financial services, healthcare, e-commerce.
So you never know where you're gonna be.
But you learn a ton all at once.
But like I said I wanted to into some smaller agency that was more of a startup
and found one where it was they really understood digital.
They actually just were only digital.
They had never done print or anything like that.
But while I was there that's where I really got my e-commerce chops.
Because we had a user research team and a user experience design team.
So what would happen is we had our own usability lab in house.
So when people were going through the e-commerce experience, shopping and then
going through the shopping cart we were able to optimize every step of the way.
And while we were studying and testing that we could between participants,
between users, we could actually change the interface and tweak it so
that we could really start dialing it in and get some of those gotchas out
right away and then start to validate that design as we went through.
>> Okay, so very tight integration between research and design.
>> Yes, though they were, we had separatism.
Cuz before I was like I was my own researcher.
Or I wouldn't be able to do the recruiting.
I would farm that out.
But I would be running my tests.
I would be creating the test, etc., which could have some
ethical implications as far as am I objective when I'm testing my own designs.
So it was good to have some of that was, okay.
I'm not, I have no skin in this game.
I'm just gonna test it for you.
So that was pretty cool.
And where I'm at now we have a user research team that goes out there,
does observations, does ethnographic research.
But also we have a usability lab here at Ithaca.
So we kinda keep it separate, yet we're tightly integrated.
I meet with them probably every other week so
that they stay ahead of my recruiting needs or testing, design needs.
>> So I'm gonna ask you for one parting thought, which is for
folks that are just starting out, maybe just looking at UX or something that
thinking about getting into, maybe thinking about moving towards a career.
Do you have any advice?
Absolutely, look at everything in your environment.
And try to think about why it's there and its purpose.
So I have a child.
And it's great to look at his toys to think about, okay.
What is its purpose?
Does it communicate that purpose and do I like it?
And so it really helps you influence of how you can think of an experience.
Like this glass for instance.
It has a purpose of it has to be a vessel to carry some water.
But there a lot of things you can do to it.
You can add color to it.
You can have different shapes.
But for instance it's not a bigger vessel.
Because you gotta hold it with your hand.
So it's think about that when you're thinking about your phone.
You have to use it with your hand.
And there's a certain amount of interaction with it and experience.
So anyone that's thinking about getting into experience design or
something like that it's fun to just critique things around you.
Because then you can start thinking critically about design and
why people create things.
>> [SOUND] >> And then it really helps you influence.
When you're in the digital realm you can do anything you want when you're not in
the physical realm.
So I like to juxtapose those things together.
>> Excellent, yeah.
So taking a designer eye view of the world
is something that you can just do throughout you entire life.
>> Right, exactly.
And try to focus on the positive things and the things that make you feel good.
Cuz a lot of times I could critic a ton of things that make me frustrated.
And a lot of times that's what a lot of users feel that too.
It's I'm so frustrated and we gotta make this better.
>> So find some positive examples too.
>> Exactly, exactly. >> Excellent, okay.
Well, thank you very much.
This has been great.
And I really appreciate you taking your time to chat with us.
>> Absolutely, thank you.